# Getting Started with Python and GitHub

## Objective:

In this project, you will complete several tasks to demonstrate your readiness for the course. By the end of the project, you will have:
1. Cloned the project repository locally to your computer.
2. Corrected syntax and logic errors in the starter code to pass all the provided tests.
3. Committed and pushed your changes back to GitHub for grading.


## Step 1 - Clone your Repo locally

Because you can see these instructions, that means that you have already followed the link and accepted the assignment. GitHub classroom has automatically created a repository for you on GitHub and imported the starting code into it. You may be reading this in a browser tab or on your phone. For the next steps, you will move this project onto your computer so that you can write and edit code in your IDE. 
1. On this page (GitHub), there is a green big button labeled Code. If you click it, you get the web URL for this online repo. Copy it to the clipboard. 
2. Open PyCharm. Do one of the following:
    - If this is your first PyCharm project, you will see a welcome screen that asks you if you want a `New Project`, `Open`, or `Get from VCS`. Click **Get from VCS**.
    - However, if you have an existing PyCharm project open, click `VCS > Get from Version Control` in the top menu. 
    - Or, if you have an existing PyCharm project that is open and is connected to a Git repo (less likely), click `Git > Clone` in the top menu. 
3. In the window that pops up in PyCharm, there is an empty box labelled URL. Paste the URL you copied from GitHub's big green Code button.
4. Click the Clone button at the bottom of the popup window.
5. If this is your first time cloning a GitHub repository using PyCharm, it will ask you to log in to GitHub, but it will give you options. As of Fall 2023, the security setup requires you to use a "token" generated by GitHub. Please click **use token**, do not click **log in**. This opens a window for you to paste in the token. There's a button to the right that says "generate token" that will take you to GitHub and the token creation screen. Leave all the options alone except for the expiration date at the top - give yourself enough time to finish the semester at least. Accept the options, and a string of characters will appear - copy and paste this back into the PyCharm window and you should be good to go. Make sure you do this as soon as the string is shown to you - if you leave or refresh the page, it will not be shown again.
6. Mark the /src and /test directories as "Sources Root" and "Test Sources Root," respectively. The easiest way to do this is by right-clicking on them and choosing these from the "Mark Directory as..." option. 

**Deliverable:** None required for this step.

## Step 2 - Correct Errors

### Syntax Errors

You should also see a simple - but definitely broken - program, HellowWorld.py, in the directory. How do you know it's broken? Well, a couple of ways. _Syntax errors_ should stand out due to the red underline in your code editor window. Placing the mouse pointer over the error should give you some insight into what is wrong with the code and potentially how to fix it. Using your existing knowledge of the language, correct the syntax errors. 
Create a copy of Helloworld.Py call it <your_name>HelloWorld.py Fix the errors in this file. 

**Deliverable:** <your_name>HelloWorld.py 

## Step 3 - Update your local repo and push to GitHub

Once you have the code where you want it, correcting as many logical and syntax errors as you can, you need to submit it back to us for grading through GitHub. The easiest way to do this is directly through PyCharm. 

1. In the Git top menu you will find the `commit` option. Depending on the layout of PyCharm on your machine, you may also see on the menu bar of icons next to the `run` command is a green check mark. Clicking this icon or choosing Git > Commit initiates a `commit`. A window will pop up. Enter a meaningful comment in the text box to indicate your progress so far. These are useful for us to understand what's working and what's not. Once you have a good message, click the `commit` button on the bottom. After a commit, you have effectively saved a local backup. Commit as many changes as you want - these are useful in case you really mess something up and need to go back to a working version of the code (we will discuss later in class how to restore these backups). But, your instructor does not have access to these commits until you `push` them.
2. In the Git top menu you will also find the `push` option. As with the check mark, on some PyCharm layouts you will also find next to the check mark a green arrow that points up and to the right. Clicking this icon or choosing Git > Push initiates a `push`. Another window will pop up, asking if you want to push any/all commits that you have made but have not yet pushed. For this project, this will be pretty simple - just click `push`. This will push committed changes from your local repository back to GitHub. Now your instructor and TA can see them.

Alternatively, you can commit and push your changes directly through the CLI:

1. `git add .` This command will stage the changes you have made to the local repository and add any new files to the repo.
2. `git commit -m replace_with_commit_message_in_quotes` This will commit staged changes to your local repository. Make sure to change the _commit_message_ to some meaningful reminder about the changes you have made.
3. `git push` This will push committed changes from your local repository back to GitHub. Now your instructor and TA can see them.

You should get used to using these commands frequently. Much of the challenge of developing complex software is learning to read error messages and feedback from the command line. If you type the command `git status` the command line will print out the current status of the repo. This will usually give you a clue for what you need to do next.

> All changes to your files should be made to your local computer, then committed/pushed to the web. While GitHub does give you the ability to directly edit certain files through the browser, you SHOULD NOT edit them in this way. I know it can be tempting for little changes like to the responses.md. But this can create synchronization problems with your local copy, which will no longer want to push to the web page. It's all very fixable, but confusing at this stage for you. So don't do it!


**Deliverable:** Push the corrected project code back to the online repository. When you are satisfied and think your work is done, let us know on Canvas by typing "DONE" into the text box. This will let us know your submission is ready to grade.

# Getting Stuck
There are times when you might get stuck on some part of an assignment. It happens to the best of us. If you need assistance on a specific part of your code, then be sure to try to `commit` AND `push` the most recent version of your files to GitHub. It makes it much easier for your instructor and TA to provide specific feedback on individual lines of code in the files that you submit. 

# Documenting your Work
Regardless of the method of pushing changes to the server, you will need to become familiar with a very common cycle of making changes to your local repository then pushing those changes back to GitHub where your instructor can review them and assign grades. When you save them through your IDE, this saves a copy of the changes you have made to your system, but have not saved them to your local repository or made them available online to us.

As demonstrated in class, you should make a habit of saving your work incrementally to GitHub. Do not treat submission as a one-time thing. Instead, think of it like a backup. If your laptop gets destroyed, GitHub will still have a copy of your latest pushed commits. This habit of frequent commits also provides us with evidence that all of the code that you submit for this course is your own. 
